Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 2914–2919
July 5 - 10, 2020. c©2020 Association for Computational Linguistics
2914
Is Your Classifier Actually Biased?
Measuring Fairness under Uncertainty with Bernstein Bounds
Kawin Ethayarajh
Stanford University
kawin@stanford.edu
Abstract
Most NLP datasets are not annotated with pro-
tected attributes such as gender, making it dif-
ficult to measure classification bias using stan-
dard measures of fairness (e.g., equal opportu-
nity). However, manually annotating a large
dataset with a protected attribute is slow and
expensive. Instead of annotating all the exam-
ples, can we annotate a subset of them and
use that sample to estimate the bias? While
it is possible to do so, the smaller this anno-
tated sample is, the less certain we are that
the estimate is close to the true bias. In this
work, we propose using Bernstein bounds to
represent this uncertainty about the bias esti-
mate as a confidence interval. We provide em-
pirical evidence that a 95% confidence inter-
val derived this way consistently bounds the
true bias. In quantifying this uncertainty, our
method, which we call Bernstein-bounded un-
fairness, helps prevent classifiers from being
deemed biased or unbiased when there is insuf-
ficient evidence to make either claim. Our find-
ings suggest that the datasets currently used
to measure specific biases are too small to
conclusively identify bias except in the most
egregious cases. For example, consider a co-
reference resolution system that is 5% more ac-
curate on gender-stereotypical sentences – to
claim it is biased with 95% confidence, we
need a bias-specific dataset that is 3.8 times
larger than WinoBias, the largest available.
1 Introduction
NLP models have drawn criticism for capturing
common social biases with respect to gender and
race (Manzini et al., 2019; Garg et al., 2018; Etha-
yarajh, 2019). These biases can be quantified by ap-
plying some metric to an embedding space (Boluk-
basi et al., 2016), but it is unclear how bias in
text embeddings affects decisions made by down-
stream classifiers. This is because bias is not prop-
agated deterministically: it is possible for mini-
mally biased embeddings to be fed into a classi-
fier that makes maximally biased predictions (and
vice-versa). Moreover, recent work has found that
WEAT (Caliskan et al., 2017), the most popular
test of embedding bias, can be easily manipulated
to claim that bias is present or absent (Ethayarajh
et al., 2019a,b).
Unlike measuring embedding bias, measuring
classification bias is difficult: most NLP datasets
are not annotated with protected attributes, preclud-
ing the use of standard fairness measures such as
equal opportunity (Hardt et al., 2016). However,
manually annotating a large dataset with a pro-
tected attribute is slow and expensive. In response
to this problem, some have created small datasets
annotated with a single protected attribute – typi-
cally gender – that is used to estimate bias on tasks
such as co-reference resolution (Zhao et al., 2018a;
Kiritchenko and Mohammad, 2018; Rudinger et al.,
2018). This can be done by creating new data or
annotating a subset of an existing dataset with the
protected attribute. Intuitively, the less data we an-
notate, the less certain we are that our sample bias
is close to the true bias (i.e., what we would get by
annotating the entire population).
We propose using Bernstein bounds to express
our uncertainty about the sample bias as a confi-
dence interval. First, we show that for standard
fairness measures such as equal opportunity and
equalized odds (Hardt et al., 2016), we can define
a cost function such that the fairness measure is
equal to the difference in expected cost incurred by
the protected and unprotected groups. We treat the
contribution of each annotated example to the bias
as a random variable. Using Bernstein’s inequal-
ity, we can thus estimate the probability that the
true bias is within a constant t of our sample bias.
Working backwards, we then derive a confidence
interval for the true bias. Treating the “genres” of
examples in MNLI (Williams et al., 2018) as the
2915
protected groups and the rate of annotator disagree-
ment as the cost, we offer empirical evidence that
our 95% confidence interval consistently bounds
the true bias.
In quantifying the uncertainty around bias esti-
mates, Bernstein-bounded unfairness helps prevent
classifiers from being deemed biased or unbiased
when there is insufficient evidence to make either
claim. For example, even when the sample bias is
positive, it is possible that the true bias between
groups is zero. Conversely, a sample bias of zero
does not ensure the absence of bias at the popu-
lation level. Moreover, our findings suggest that
most bias-specific datasets in NLP are too small to
conclusively identify bias except in the most egre-
gious cases. For example, consider a co-reference
resolution system that is 5% more accurate on
gender-stereotypical sentences. For us to claim that
this system is gender-biased with 95% confidence,
we would need a bias-specific dataset that is 3.8
times larger than WinoBias (Zhao et al., 2018a), the
largest such dataset currently available. Not only
does the NLP community need more bias-specific
datasets, but it also needs datasets that are much
larger than the ones it currently has.
2 Bernstein-Bounded Unfairness
In this section, we present the core idea of our
paper: Bernstein-bounded unfairness (BBU). In
practice, we estimate the bias – which we call the
groupwise disparity – using a small sample of an-
notated data. Given that this estimate deviates from
the true bias (i.e., at the population level), BBU
helps us express our uncertainty about the bias esti-
mate using a confidence interval.
Definition 2.1. Let c : (y, ŷ)→ [0,C] denote the
cost of predicting ŷ when the true label is y, where
C ∈ R+ is the maximum cost that can be incurred.
Definition 2.2. Let f : x → {−1,0,+1} denote
an annotation function that maps an example to
the protected group A (+1), the unprotected group
B (−1), or neither (0). The groupwise disparity
δ ( f ;c) between groups A and B is the difference
in expected cost incurred by each group:
δ ( f ;c) = Ea [c(ya, ŷa)]−Eb [c(yb, ŷb)]
Definition 2.3. The amortized disparity δ̂ (xi, f ;c)
for an example xi, given an annotation function f
and cost function c, is:
δ̂ (xi, f ;c) =
c(yi, ŷi) f (xi)
Pr[ f (x) = f (xi)]
The amortized disparity of xi is an estimate of
the groupwise disparity based solely on xi. The
expectation over all amortized disparities is the
groupwise disparity: δ ( f ;c) = Ex[δ̂ (x, f ;c)]. In
practice, given n i.i.d. examples X , we can take a
Monte Carlo estimate of δ ( f ;c) by partitioning X
into the protected and unprotected groups using f
and then calculating the difference in mean cost.
An equivalent way of framing this is that we have n
random variables δ̂ (x1, f ;c), ..., δ̂ (xn, f ;c) and we
are taking their mean to estimate δ ( f ;c). Because
examples X are i.i.d., so are the random variables.
This means that we can use Bernstein’s inequality
to calculate the probability that the sample mean
δ̄ deviates from the true groupwise disparity δ by
some constant t > 0. Where [−m,m] bounds each
random variable δ̂ (xi, f ;c) and σ2 = 1n ∑Var[δ̂i]
denotes their variance, by Bernstein’s inequality:
Pr[|δ̄ −δ | > t] = Pr[|δ̄ −E[δ̂ ]| > t]
≤ 2exp
(
−nt2
2σ2 + 23 tm
)
(1)
Since the interval [−m,m] is defined by the fre-
quency of protected and unprotected examples
(2.3), if we want it to strictly bound the random
variable, it should be [−NC,NC], where N is the
population size and we assume that there is at least
one protected example. However, if this were the
interval, (1) could be criticized for being too loose
a bound and effectively useless. Therefore we as-
sume that the proportion of the population that is
protected and unprotected is bounded and that the
lower bounds on these proportions are known.
Definition 2.4. Let γA,γB denote the lower bounds
of the proportion of the population that is protected
and unprotected respectively. Let γ = min(γA,γB).
Note that the protected group does not necessar-
ily have to be the smaller of the two groups in this
setup. We set γ to be the lesser of γA and γB to
reflect this: if the unprotected group is smaller than
the protected group, then [−m,m] will be bounded
in [−C/γB,C/γB].
Proposition 2.5. Under (2.4), [−m,m] ⊆ [−Cγ ,
C
γ ]
for any random variable. Using this interval, (1)
can be rewritten as:
Pr[|δ̄ −δ | > t]≤ 2exp
(
−nt2
2σ2 + 2C3γ t
)
(2)
Proposition 2.6. For a given confidence ρ ∈ [0,1)
that the true groupwise disparity δ falls in the inter-
2916
val [δ̄ − t, δ̄ + t], we can derive t ∈ R+ as follows:
t =
B+
√
B2−8nσ2 log
[1
2(1−ρ)
]
2n
where B =−2C
3γ
log
[
1
2
(1−ρ)
] (3)
This can be derived by rearranging (2) after set-
ting both sides to be equal and then applying the
quadratic formula to find the solution to t. Note that
the width of the confidence interval grows as: (a)
the desired confidence ρ increases; (b) the sample
size n decreases; (c) γ decreases. To our knowl-
edge, Bernstein bounds are the tightest that can
be applied here, as they consider the variance of
the random variables. We also validated empiri-
cally that they are a better candidate than Hoeffding
bounds, another common choice.
Standard Fairness Measures How can we use
Bernstein-bounded unfairness to derive confidence
intervals when the bias metric is demographic par-
ity, equal opportunity, or equalized odds?
• Demographic parity requires that the success
rates be equal across all groups. In this case,
the cost would be c(y, ŷ) = (1− ŷ), since the
rate of predicting a positive outcome (ŷ = 1)
must be the same. There are no constraints on
the annotation function f .
• Equal opportunity requires that the true posi-
tive rates be equal across groups (Hardt et al.,
2016). The cost would still be (1− ŷ) but the
annotation function would be g(x) = f (x) ·
y(x). To use terminology from Hardt et al.
(2016), including y(x) means that we annotate
“qualified” examples (i.e., y(x) = 1) but not
“unqualified” ones (i.e., y(x) = 0).
• Equalized odds requires that both true and
false positive rates be equal across groups
(Hardt et al., 2016). The annotation function
would be the same as for equal opportunity but
the cost would have to account for differences
in false positive rates as well. This could be
done by letting c be the zero-one loss.
It is thus possible to define the cost and annota-
tion functions such that the groupwise disparity is
equivalent to the bias defined by a common fairness
measure. Because of our framing of the problem,
we treat the cost as something to be minimized.
For example, for equal opportunity, the groupwise
disparity was defined as the difference in false neg-
ative rates. However, we could set c(y, ŷ) = ŷ for
equal opportunity as well, such that the groupwise
disparity is the difference in true positive rates.
Both perspectives are equivalent, but one may be
more intuitive depending on the use case.
3 Proof-of-Concept Experiments
We begin by providing empirical evidence that a
95% BBU confidence interval consistently bounds
the true bias (i.e., population-level groupwise dis-
parity). We conduct our experiments on the MNLI
dev set (Williams et al., 2018), used for testing
natural language inference. We treat the genres
of examples in MNLI as the “protected groups”.
Since the genre annotations are given, we calcu-
late the true bias as the difference in annotator dis-
agreement rates for in-genre versus out-genre ex-
amples, effectively treating the human annotators
as the classifier whose bias we want to measure.
We then use BBU and check whether the true bias
falls within the 95% confidence interval when we
estimate the bias using a subset of the data.
The experiments on MNLI do not measure an
important social bias. Rather, they are meant to be
a proof-of-concept. We treat the MNLI genres as
“protected groups” because the protected attribute
– the genre – is clearly annotated. We use MNLI
over smaller datasets annotated with attributes such
as gender because this setup – where the cost is
the rate of annotator disagreement – does not re-
quire any model training, making our results easy
to replicate. Moreover, this use case illustrates that
our conception of bias need not be restricted to so-
cial biases – it can be the difference in cost incurred
by any arbitrarily defined groups.
Lastly, we examine how large a bias-specific
dataset needs to be in order to conclude that a
given classifier is biased. Specifically, we consider
a co-reference resolution system that is more accu-
rate on sentences containing stereotypical gender
roles. Fixing the confidence level at ρ = 0.95, we
show that as the magnitude of the sample bias δ̄
decreases, we need a larger bias-specific dataset
(i.e., larger n) in order to make a bias claim with
95% confidence.
3.1 Setup
Annotator Disagreement The MNLI dev set
has 10 genres of examples (e.g., ‘fiction’), with
2917
Figure 1: The true bias (red) for the ‘government’ genre in MNLI and our bias estimates with 95% confidence
intervals (blue), based on a small sample of the data. The bias is defined as the difference in annotator disagreement
rates across genres. Our confidence intervals consistently bound the true bias, and the bound grows tighter as the
sample size increases (left) and the frequency of the protected group increases (right). On the left, the protected
group frequency is fixed at 0.1; on the right, the sample size is fixed at 500.
Genre In-Genre Cost Out-Genre Cost ∆
facetoface 0.116 0.128 −0.012
fiction 0.122 0.128 −0.006
government 0.154 0.124 0.029
letters 0.105 0.130 −0.024
nineeleven 0.115 0.129 −0.014
oup 0.132 0.127 0.005
slate 0.147 0.125 0.022
telephone 0.125 0.127 −0.002
travel 0.111 0.129 −0.018
verbatim 0.146 0.125 0.021
Table 1: The mean in-genre and out-genre cost for each
genre in MNLI, where the cost per example is the rate
of annotator disagreement with the gold label.
roughly 2000 per genre. Since the genre annotation
is known, we treat it as the protected attribute. We
define the cost for a given example as the propor-
tion of human annotators whose annotation differs
from the gold label. The true bias for each genre
(i.e., the groupwise disparity across all data) is the
difference in mean cost incurred by the in-genre
and out-genre examples. These statistics are in
Table 1. The annotation function for each genre
just samples some in-genre and out-genre exam-
ples to be the protected and unprotected groups
respectively. In this setup, the ratio of in-genre to
out-genre examples is controlled by γ (2.4). We
then use this sample to calculate a 95% confidence
interval [δ̄ − t, δ̄ + t]. If ∆ in Table 1 falls within
[δ̄ − t, δ̄ + t], then the BBU confidence interval cor-
rectly bounds the true bias for that genre.
Gender Bias For our second experiment, we con-
sider a hypothetical co-reference resolution system
M that is more accurate when the input sentence
is gender-stereotypical. For example, M might
assume that ‘doctor’ is always replaced with a
male pronoun and ‘nurse’ with a female pronoun.
The existence of such systems motivated the cre-
ation of bias-specific datasets such as WinoBias
and WinoGender for co-reference resolution (Zhao
et al., 2018b; Rudinger et al., 2018). We define the
cost for a given example as the zero-one loss (i.e.,
1[y 6= ŷ]) so that the true bias corresponds to the dif-
ference in accuracy between gender-stereotypical
and non-gender-stereotypical sentences. The for-
mer is our protected group. Say δ̄ = 0.05 – that is,
M is 5 percentage points more accurate on gender-
stereotypical sentences. How large must n be for
us to claim with 95% confidence that M is gender-
biased (i.e., for 0 6∈ [δ̄ − t, δ̄ + t])?
3.2 Bounding Population-level Bias
On the MNLI data, even when as few as 100 ex-
amples are sampled and used to estimate the bias,
a 95% BBU confidence interval bounds the true
bias 100% of the time. This outcome is the average
across all MNLI genres after averaging the results
across 20 runs. As seen in Figure 1, 95% BBU
bounds also grow tighter as the annotated sample
size n increases and the frequency of the protected
group γ increases from 0.1 to 0.5. Based on the
derivation of the interval width in (3), both of these
trends are expected.
3.3 Making Claims of Bias
In our gender bias experiment, we want to know
how large n needs to be such that given δ̄ = 0.05,
2918
Figure 2: The bias estimate δ̄ of a co-reference resolu-
tion system M is calculated on a sample of annotated
data. How much data do we need to claim that M is
gender-biased with 95% confidence? The smaller the
bias estimate, the more data required. WinoBias, the
largest such dataset available, can only be used when
δ̄ ≥ 0.0975.
we can say with 95% confidence that the co-
reference resolution system M is gender-biased.
In other words, we want to find the smallest n such
that 0 6∈ [δ̄ − t, δ̄ + t]. Since δ̄ > 0, we can set
t← δ̄ and work backwards from (2):
n >
(2σ2 + 2C3γ δ̄ )
(
− log
[1
2(1−ρ)
])
δ̄ 2
(4)
In our hypothetical scenario, the maximum cost
C = 1, the bias estimate δ̄ = 0.05, and ρ = 0.95.
We assume that γ = 0.5, since bias-specific datasets
often have equally many protected and unprotected
examples. We also assume that the variance is
maximal (i.e., σ2 = (C/γ)2).
With these inputs, n > 11903: in other words,
we would need a bias-specific dataset with at least
11903 examples to claim with 95% confidence that
the system M is biased. This is ≈ 3.8 times larger
than the size of WinoBias (Zhao et al., 2018a), the
largest such dataset currently available. In Figure
2, we plot the amount of data needed against the
magnitude of sample bias δ̄ . Note that with Wino-
Bias, which has 3160 examples, we could only
make a bias claim with 95% confidence if the bias
estimate δ̄ = 0.0975 or higher (i.e., if the system
M were 9.75 percentage points more accurate on
the gender-stereotypical examples in WinoBias).
3.4 Implications
It is possible to claim the existence of bias in a
particular direction without knowing what the true
bias is. For example, consider the γ = 0.5 error
bars in Figure 1 (right): the 95% confidence inter-
val for the bias faced by the ‘government’ genre in
MNLI falls in the range (0.0, 0.12). This means that
we are 95% confident that ‘government’ examples
in MNLI face more annotator disagreement than
other genres, even if we do not know precisely how
much more that is. However, as shown in section
3.3, datasets currently used to estimate classifica-
tion bias in NLP – such as WinoBias (Zhao et al.,
2018b) and WinoGender (Rudinger et al., 2018) –
are too small to conclusively identify bias except
in the most egregious cases.
There are two possible remedies to this. For
one, even though we applied what we thought was
the tightest applicable bound, it may be possible
to derive a tighter confidence interval for δ . If so,
one could use smaller datasets to make bias claims
with a high degree of confidence. However, even
in this optimistic scenario, current datasets would
probably remain insufficient for detecting small
magnitudes of bias. The more straightforward rem-
edy would be to create larger bias-specific datasets.
Even MNLI, for example, is orders of magnitude
larger than WinoBias, suggesting that creating large
bias-specific datasets is well within the realm of
possibility.
4 Conclusion
We first showed that many standard measures of
fairness (e.g., equal opportunity) can be expressed
as the difference in expected cost incurred by pro-
tected and unprotected groups. Given that most
bias estimates are made using small samples, we
proposed Bernstein-bounded unfairness (BBU) for
quantifying the uncertainty about a bias estimate
using a confidence interval. Using MNLI, we pro-
vided empirical evidence that 95% BBU confidence
intervals consistently bound the true population-
level bias. In quantifying this uncertainty, BBU
helps prevent classifiers from being deemed biased
or unbiased when there is insufficient evidence to
make either claim. Although datasets currently
used to estimate classification bias (e.g., WinoBias)
are undoubtedly a step in the right direction, our
findings suggest that they need to be much larger
in order to be a useful diagnostic.
Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Aidan Perreault, Dallas Card, and
Tengyu Ma for providing detailed feedback. We
thank Nelson Liu for helpful discussion.
2919
References
Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y Zou,
Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam T Kalai. 2016.
Man is to computer programmer as woman is to
homemaker? debiasing word embeddings. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pages 4349–4357.
Aylin Caliskan, Joanna J Bryson, and Arvind
Narayanan. 2017. Semantics derived automatically
from language corpora contain human-like biases.
Science, 356(6334):183–186.
Kawin Ethayarajh. 2019. Rotate king to get queen:
Word relationships as orthogonal transformations in
embedding space. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and the 9th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
IJCNLP), pages 3503–3508, Hong Kong, China. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Kawin Ethayarajh, David Duvenaud, and Graeme Hirst.
2019a. Towards understanding linear word analo-
gies. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 3253–3262.
Kawin Ethayarajh, David Duvenaud, and Graeme Hirst.
2019b. Understanding undesirable word embedding
associations. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 1696–1705.
Nikhil Garg, Londa Schiebinger, Dan Jurafsky, and
James Zou. 2018. Word embeddings quantify
100 years of gender and ethnic stereotypes. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
115(16):E3635–E3644.
Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, Nati Srebro, et al. 2016.
Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. In
Advances in neural information processing systems,
pages 3315–3323.
Svetlana Kiritchenko and Saif Mohammad. 2018. Ex-
amining gender and race bias in two hundred sen-
timent analysis systems. In Proceedings of the
Seventh Joint Conference on Lexical and Computa-
tional Semantics, pages 43–53.
Thomas Manzini, Lim Yao Chong, Alan W Black, and
Yulia Tsvetkov. 2019. Black is to criminal as cau-
casian is to police: Detecting and removing multi-
class bias in word embeddings. In Proceedings of
the 2019 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
and Short Papers), pages 615–621.
Rachel Rudinger, Jason Naradowsky, Brian Leonard,
and Benjamin Van Durme. 2018. Gender bias in
coreference resolution. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers),
pages 8–14.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman.
2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-
tence understanding through inference. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume
1 (Long Papers), pages 1112–1122. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Jieyu Zhao, Tianlu Wang, Mark Yatskar, Vicente Or-
donez, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2018a. Gender bias
in coreference resolution: Evaluation and debiasing
methods. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers), pages 15–20.
Jieyu Zhao, Yichao Zhou, Zeyu Li, Wei Wang, and Kai-
Wei Chang. 2018b. Learning gender-neutral word
embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 4847–4853.
