Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 4508–4513
July 5 - 10, 2020. c©2020 Association for Computational Linguistics
4508
Template-Based Question Generation from Retrieved
Sentences for Improved Unsupervised Question Answering
Alexander R. Fabbri† 1,2 Patrick Ng‡1
Zhiguo Wang‡ Ramesh Nallapati‡ Bing Xiang‡
[†]Yale University [‡]AWS AI Labs
alexander.fabbri@yale.edu, {patricng, zhiguow, rnallapa, bxiang}@amazon.com
Abstract
Question Answering (QA) is in increasing
demand as the amount of information avail-
able online and the desire for quick access
to this content grows. A common approach
to QA has been to fine-tune a pretrained lan-
guage model on a task-specific labeled dataset.
This paradigm, however, relies on scarce, and
costly to obtain, large-scale human-labeled
data. We propose an unsupervised approach
to training QA models with generated pseudo-
training data. We show that generating ques-
tions for QA training by applying a simple
template on a related, retrieved sentence rather
than the original context sentence improves
downstream QA performance by allowing the
model to learn more complex context-question
relationships. Training a QA model on this
data gives a relative improvement over a pre-
vious unsupervised model in F1 score on the
SQuAD dataset by about 14%, and 20% when
the answer is a named entity, achieving state-
of-the-art performance on SQuAD for unsuper-
vised QA.
1 Introduction
Question Answering aims to answer a question
based on a given knowledge source. Recent ad-
vances have driven the performance of QA sys-
tems to above or near-human performance on
QA datasets such as SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al.,
2016) and Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski et al.,
2019) thanks to pretrained language models such
as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), XLNet (Yang et al.,
2019) and RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019). Fine-tuning
these language models, however, requires large-
scale data for fine-tuning. Creating a dataset for ev-
ery new domain is extremely costly and practically
infeasible. The ability to apply QA models on out-
of-domain data in an efficient manner is thus very
1Equal contribution
2Work done during internship at the AWS AI Labs
Figure 1: Question Generation Pipeline: the original
context sentence containing a given answer is used as
a query to retrieve a related sentence containing match-
ing entities, which is input into our question-style con-
verter to create QA training data.
desirable. This problem may be approached with
domain adaptation or transfer learning techniques
(Chung et al., 2018) as well as data augmentation
(Yang et al., 2017; Dhingra et al., 2018; Wang et al.,
2018; Alberti et al., 2019). However, here we ex-
pand upon the recently introduced task of unsuper-
vised question answering (Lewis et al., 2019) to
examine the extent to which synthetic training data
alone can be used to train a QA model.
In particular, we focus on the machine reading
comprehension setting in which the context is a
given paragraph, and the QA model can only access
this paragraph to answer a question. Furthermore,
we work on extractive QA, where the answer is as-
sumed to be a contiguous sub-string of the context.
A training instance for supervised reading compre-
hension consists of three components: a question,
a context, and an answer. For a given dataset do-
main, a collection of documents can usually be
easily obtained, providing context in the form of
paragraphs or sets of sentences. Answers can be
gathered from keywords and phrases from the con-
text. We focus mainly on factoid QA; the question
concerns a concise fact. In particular, we empha-
size questions whose answers are named entities,
the majority type of factoid questions. Entities can
be extracted from text using named entity recog-
nition (NER) techniques as the training instance’s
answer. Thus, the main challenge, and the focus
1
4509
of this paper, is creating a relevant question from a
(context, answer) pair in an unsupervised manner.
Recent work of (Lewis et al., 2019) uses style
transfer for generating questions for (context, an-
swer) pairs but shows little improvement over ap-
plying a much simpler question generator which
drops, permutates and masks words. We improve
upon this paper by proposing a simple, intuitive, re-
trieval and template-based question generation
approach, illustrated in Figure 1. The idea is to
retrieve a sentence from the corpus similar to the
current context, and then generate a question based
on that sentence. Having created a question for
all (context, answer) pairs, we then fine-tune a pre-
trained BERT model on this data and evaluate on
the SQuAD v1.1 dataset (Rajpurkar et al., 2016).
Our contributions are as follows: we intro-
duce a retrieval, template-based framework which
achieves state-of-the-art results on SQuAD for un-
supervised models, particularly when the answer
is a named entity. We perform ablation studies
to determine the effect of components in template
question generation. We are releasing our synthetic
training data and code.1
2 Unsupervised QA Approach
We focus on creating high-quality, non-trivial ques-
tions which will allow the model to learn to extract
the proper answer from a context-question pair.
Sentence Retrieval: A standard cloze question
can be obtained by taking the original sentence
in which the answer appears from the context and
masking the answer with a chosen token. How-
ever, a model trained on this data will only learn
text matching and how to fill-in-the-blank, with
little generalizability. For this reason, we chose
to use a retrieval-based approach to obtain a sen-
tence similar to that which contains the answer,
upon which to create a given question. For our
experiments, we focused on answers which are
named entities, which has proven to be a useful
prior assumption for downstream QA performance
(Lewis et al., 2019) confirmed by our initial ex-
periments. First, we indexed all of the sentences
from a Wikipedia dump using the ElasticSearch
search engine. We also extract named entities for
each sentence in both the Wikipedia corpus and the
sentences used as queries. We assume access to a
named-entity recognition system, and in this work
1https://github.com/awslabs/
unsupervised-qa
Figure 2: Example of synthetically generated ques-
tions using generic cloze-style questions as well as a
template-based approach.
make use of the spaCy2 NER pipeline. Then, for
a given context-answer pair, we query the index,
using the original context sentence as a query, to
return a sentence which (1) contains the answer,
(2) does not come from the context, and (3) has a
lower than 95% F1 score with the query sentence
to discard highly similar or plagiarized sentences.
Besides ensuring that the retrieved sentence and
query sentence share the answer entity, we require
that at least one additional matching entity appears
in both the query sentence and in the entire context,
and we perform ablation studies on the effect of
this matching below. These retrieved sentences are
then fed into our question-generation module.
Template-based Question Generation: We
consider several question styles (1) generic cloze-
style questions where the answer is replaced
by the token “[MASK]”, (2) templated ques-
tion “Wh+B+A+?” as well as variations on the
ordering of this template, as shown in Figure
2. Given the retrieved sentence in the form
of [Fragment A] [Answer] [Fragment
B], the templated question “Wh+B+A+?” replaces
the answer with a Wh-component (e.g., what, who,
where), which depends on the entity type of the
answer and places the Wh-component at the be-
ginning of the question, followed by sentence
Fragment B and Fragment A. For the choice
of wh-component, we sample a bi-gram based on
prior probabilities of that bi-gram being associated
with the named-entity type of the answer. This prior
probability is calculated based on named-entity
and question bi-gram starters from the SQuAD
dataset. This information does not make use of
the full context-question-answer and can be viewed
2https://spacy.io
4510
as prior information, not disturbing the integrity
of our unsupervised approach. Additionally, the
choice of wh component does not significantly af-
fect results. For template-based approaches, we
also experimented with clause-based templates but
did not find significant differences in performance.
3 Experiments
Settings: For all downstream question answering
models, we fine-tune a pretrained BERT model us-
ing the Transformers repository (Wolf et al., 2019)
and report ablation study numbers using the base-
uncased version of BERT, consistent with (Lewis
et al., 2019). All models are trained and validated
on generated pairs of questions and answers along
with their contexts tested on the SQuAD develop-
ment set. The training set differs for each ablation
study and will be described below, while the valida-
tion dataset is a random set of 1,000 template-based
generated data points, which is consistent across
all ablation studies. We train all QA models for 2
epochs, checkpointing the models every 500 steps
and choosing the checkpoint with the highest F1
score on the validation set as the best model. All
ablation studies are averaged over two training runs
with different seeds. Unless otherwise stated, ex-
periments are performed using 50,000 synthetic
QA training examples, as initial models performed
best with this amount. We will make this generated
training data public.
3.1 Model Analysis
Effect of retrieved sentences: We test the effect
of retrieved vs original sentences as input to ques-
tion generation when using generic cloze questions.
As shown in Table 1, using retrieved sentences
improves over using the original sentence, rein-
forcing our motivation that a retrieved sentence,
which may not match trivially the current context,
forces the QA model to learn more complex re-
lationships than just simple entity matching. The
retrieval process may return sentences which do not
match the original context. On a random sample,
15/18 retrieved sentences were judged as entirely
relevant to the original sentence. This retrieval
is already quite good, as we use a high quality
ElasticSearch retrieval and use the original context
sentence as the query, not just the answer word.
While we do not explicitly ensure that the retrieved
sentence has the same meaning, we find that the
search results with entity matching gives largely
Training procedure EM F1
Cloze-style original 17.36 25.90
Cloze-style retrieved 30.53 39.61
Table 1: Effect of original vs retrieved sentences for
generic cloze-style question generation.
semantically matching sentences. Additionally, we
believe the sentences which have loosely related
meaning may act as a regularization factor which
prevent the downstream QA model from learning
only string matching patterns. Along these lines,
(Lewis et al., 2019) found that a simple noise func-
tion of dropping, masking and permuting words
was a strong question generation baseline. We be-
lieve that loosely related context sentences can act
as a more intuitive noise function, and investigat-
ing the role of the semantic match of the retrieved
sentences is an important direction for future work.
For the sections which follow, we only show results
of retrieved sentences, as the trend of improved per-
formance held across all experiments.
Effect of template components: We evaluate
the effect of individual template components on
downstream QA performance. Results are shown
in Table 2. Wh template methods improve largely
over the simple cloze templates. “Wh + B + A + ?”
performs best among the template-based methods,
as having the Wh word at the beginning most re-
sembles the target SQuAD domain and switching
the order of Fragment B and Fragment A may force
the model to learn more complex relationships from
the question. We additionally test the effect of the
wh-component and the question mark added at the
end of the sentence. Using the same data as “Wh +
B + A + ?” but removing the wh-component results
in a large decrease in performance. We believe that
this is because the wh-component signals the type
of possible answer entities, which helps narrow
down the space of possible answers. Removing the
question mark at the end of the template also results
in decreased performance, but not as large as re-
moving the wh-component. This may be a result of
BERT pretraining which expects certain punctua-
tion based on sentence structure. We note that these
questions may not be grammatical, which may have
an impact on performance. Improving the ques-
tion quality makes a difference in performance as
seen from the jump from cloze-style questions to
template questions. The ablation studies suggest
that a combination of question relevance, though
4511
Template data EM F1
Cloze 30.53 39.61
A + Wh + B + ? 45.62 55.44
Wh + A + B + ? 44.08 53.90
Wh + B + A + ? 46.09 56.82
B + A + ? 37.57 46.41
Wh + B + A 44.87 54.56
Wh simple + B + A + ? 45.60 56.07
What + B + A + ? 10.24 17.04
Table 2: Effect of order of template, wh word and ques-
tion mark on downstream QA performance.
matching entities, and question formulation, as de-
scribed above, determine downstream performance.
Balancing those two components is an interesting
problem and we leave improving grammaticality
and fluency through means such as language model
generation for future experiments.
In the last two rows of Table 2, we show the ef-
fect of using the wh bi-gram prior on downstream
QA training. Using the most-common wh word
by grouping named entities into 5 categories ac-
cording to (Lewis et al., 2019) performs very close
to the best-performing wh n-gram prior method,
while using a single wh-word (what) results in a
significant decrease in performance. These results
suggest that information about named entity type
signaled by the wh-word does provide important
information to the model but further information
beyond wh-simple does not improve results signifi-
cantly.
Effect of filtering by entity matching: Besides
ensuring that the retrieved sentence and query sen-
tence share the answer entity, we require that at
least one additional matching entity appears in
both query sentence and entire context. Results
are shown in Table 3. Auxillary matching leads
to improvements over no matching when using
template-based data, with best results using match-
ing with both query and context. Matching may
filter some sentences whose topic are too far from
the original context. We leave further investiga-
tion of the effect of retrieved sentence relevance to
future work.
Effect of synthetic training dataset size: No-
tably, (Lewis et al., 2019) make use of approxi-
mately 4 million synthetic data points in order to
train their model. However, we are able to train
a model with better performance in much fewer
examples, and show that such a large subset is un-
necessary for their released synthetic training data
Matching procedure EM F1
No matching 41.02 50.81
Query matching 44.76 54.87
Context matching 44.22 55.35
Query + Context matching 46.09 56.82
Table 3: Effect of query and context matching for re-
trieved input to question generation module on down-
stream QA performance.
Figure 3: A comparison of the effect of the size of syn-
thetic data on downstream QA performance.
as well. Figure 3 shows the performance from
training over random subsets of differing sizes and
testing on the SQuAD development data. We sam-
ple a random question for each context from the
data of (Lewis et al., 2019). Even with as little as
10k datapoints, training from our synthetically gen-
erated template-based data with auxiliary matching
outperforms the results from ablation studies in
(Lewis et al., 2019). Using data from our template-
based data consistently outperforms that of (Lewis
et al., 2019). Training on either dataset shows simi-
lar trends; performance decreases after increasing
the number of synthetic examples past 100,000,
likely due to a distributional mismatch with the
SQuAD data. We chose to use 50,000 examples for
our final experiments with other ablation studies
as this number gave good performance in initial
experiments.
3.2 Comparison of Best-Performing Models:
We compare training on our best template-based
data with state-of-the-art in Table 4. SQuAD F1
results reflect results on the hidden SQuAD test
set. We report single-model numbers; Lewis et al.
(2019) report an ensemble method achieving 56.40
F1 and a best single model achieving 54.7 F1. We
make use of the whole-word-masking version of
4512
Model Choice SQuAD Test F1 SQuAD NER F1
BERT-large (ours) 64.04 77.55
BERT-large (Lewis et al., 2019) 56.40 64.50
Table 4: A comparison of top results using the BERT-
large model.
BERT-large, although using the original BERT-
large gives similar performance of 62.69 on the
SQuAD dev set. We report numbers on the sam-
ple of SQuAD questions which are named entities,
which we refer to as SQuAD-NER. The subset cor-
responding to the SQuAD development dataset has
4,338 samples, and may differ slightly from (Lewis
et al., 2019) due to differences in NER preprocess-
ing. We also trained a fully-supervised model on
the SQuAD training dataset with varying amounts
of data and found our unsupervised performance
equals the supervised performance trained on about
3,000 labeled examples.
4 Conclusion
In this paper we introduce a retrieval-based ap-
proach to unsupervised extractive question answer-
ing. A simple template-based approach achieves
state-of-the-art results for unsupervised methods
on the SQuAD dataset of 64.04 F1, and 77.55 F1
when the answer is a named entity. We analyze the
effect of several components in our template-based
approaches through ablation studies. We aim to
experiment with other datasets and other domains,
incorporate our synthetic data in a semi-supervised
setting and test the feasibility of our framework in
a multi-lingual setting.
5 Acknowledgements
We thank Xiaofei Ma for fruitful discussions on the
project.
References
Chris Alberti, Daniel Andor, Emily Pitler, Jacob De-
vlin, and Michael Collins. 2019. Synthetic QA cor-
pora generation with roundtrip consistency. In Pro-
ceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 6168–
6173, Florence, Italy. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Yu-An Chung, Hung-Yi Lee, and James Glass. 2018.
Supervised and unsupervised transfer learning for
question answering. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers),
pages 1585–1594, New Orleans, Louisiana. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers),
pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Bhuwan Dhingra, Danish Danish, and Dheeraj Ra-
jagopal. 2018. Simple and effective semi-supervised
question answering. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers),
pages 582–587, New Orleans, Louisiana. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Red-
field, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris Al-
berti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob De-
vlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion Jones,
Matthew Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai,
Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav Petrov. 2019.
Natural questions: A benchmark for question an-
swering research. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, 7:453–466.
Patrick Lewis, Ludovic Denoyer, and Sebastian Riedel.
2019. Unsupervised question answering by cloze
translation. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 4896–4910, Florence, Italy. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-
proach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions for
machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of
the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 2383–2392, Austin,
Texas. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Liang Wang, Sujian Li, Wei Zhao, Kewei Shen, Meng
Sun, Ruoyu Jia, and Jingming Liu. 2018. Multi-
perspective context aggregation for semi-supervised
cloze-style reading comprehension. In Proceedings
of the 27th International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 857–867, Santa Fe, New
Mexico, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-
ric Cistac, Tim Rault, R’emi Louf, Morgan Funtow-
4513
icz, and Jamie Brew. 2019. HuggingFace’s Trans-
formers: State-of-the-art Natural Language Process-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771.
Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime G.
Carbonell, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V. Le.
2019. XLNet: Generalized Autoregressive Pretrain-
ing for Language Understanding. In Proceedings of
NeurIPS 2019.
Zhilin Yang, Junjie Hu, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and
William Cohen. 2017. Semi-supervised QA with
generative domain-adaptive nets. In Proceedings
of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 1040–1050, Vancouver, Canada. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
